---
layout: default
img: phones.png
category: CS506
title: What is Ransomware?
description: |
---
Ransomware is a <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_virus" target="_blank">computer virus</a> that will encrypt files on your computer or mobile device and prevent you from accessing them unless you pay a fee (“ransom”). The most common targets are pictures, documents, and other personal data. There is no guarantee that you will get your files back after paying the ransom.
There is a rising trend of ransomware affecting computers, particularly those that run Microsoft Windows Operating Systems. This virus will attack all files accessible from your computer, including those on Administrator Account and Local Drive. Unless you have an external backup, your files will be unrecoverable.
<p >The horrible state of inaccessible files and computer systems, make ransomware one of the most dangerous malwares of our time. The market has witnessed two common types of such viruses:</p>
<ul>
<li><strong>Encrypting Ransomware:</strong> This particular malware encrypts the user files, networks and data, and demands a decryption price or ransom, mostly in bitcoin. <strong>CryptoLocker, Locky</strong> and <strong>CryptoWall</strong> are some of its examples.</li>
<li><strong>Locker Ransomware:</strong> Infection by this ransomware will deny your access to the computer system. It will lock you out and will demand a ransom if you want to regain access. The common examples include <strong>&#8220;Police-themed&#8221;, ransomware</strong> and <strong>Winlocker.</strong></li>
</ul>
<p >While both types are targeted at denying access to something that you want, crypto-ransomware or encrypting ransomware is particularly harmful. How?</p>
<p >Locker Ransomware, simply locks the user interface that stops you from accessing the system. It will not allow you to log into the system. In some cases, even the mouse and some of the keyboard functionalities are also denied. As the virus attack is on the user interface, chances are there that the underlying systems are safe, and hence the malware can be cleaned easily.</p>
<p >In case of crypto ransomware, the condition is worse. The files and data are locked or encrypted such that it may result in absolute data loss. The data can range from person to person. For some, it may be a lost family album, while for a professional, it may be loss of an important financial report. Anything can be encrypted, be it any document, video, audio or any image. Thus, crypto ransomware directly hits your valuable data.</p><br/>
<h4>How to protect a computer from ransomware attack</h4>
<p >Ransomware is definitely a serious threat to your computer system. Hence, precaution is always better than cure. If you are able to stop the virus from entering your PC, then you can rest assured of your data. But for that, you should know how you can fall victim to a ransomware attack:</p>
<ul>
<li><strong>Suspicious and spam emails</strong> are the secret paths for these intruders. You may receive some malicious emails probing you to download them. It may sound like &#8220;You have won the lucky draw, open attachment to claim your money.&#8221; Unknown email IDs and very similar looking brand names can mislead you to download a wrong attachment, and get malware installed on your system.</li>
<li><strong>USB drives</strong> that are already infected with the virus. When you use your drives on multiple devices, most commonly on public computers, you might unknowingly invite viruses.</li>
<li>Some viruses get installed while you are downloading third party software or exchanging files on a network.</li>
<li>Following any link leading to a comprised or hacked website can also let the malware into your system from already-present malware on your systems.</li>
</ul><br/>
<p>Now that we know from where these malwares can enter your computer systems, let's have a look at the preventive measures.</p>
<h4>Secure your email</h4>
<p >Email protection against any intrusive, malicious, unrecognized mail ids can prove to be a great prevention against the malware. Taking an email hosting from trusted providers, will give you filtered access to your email, and protection from any intruder. The email service should also provide protection against spam. Also you should not:</p>
<ul>
<li>Open any suspicious or unrecognized email.</li>
<li>Open links in a suspicious mail.</li>
<li>Download attachment from unrecognized sources.</li>
</ul>
<h4>Protect your browser</h4>
<p >Protecting your browser can also help. Always keep your system software and browser version updated. A small loophole in software might cost you your system. You can also install a good quality Antivirus software that may block pop-ups, and warn you before opening infected websites.</p>
<h4>Backup your data</h4>
<p >We know, you will not leave any stone unturned in order to protect your data. But still, the best practice should be to regularly create backup of your data. Creating a backup in Cloud would be the best. Cloud backup services save and protect your data and makes it available if any disaster strikes.</p>
<h4>Aware yourself and the people around you</h4>
<p >Ransomware is not a new malware, the first cases were found in Russia in the year 2005. But at that time, the victims were lesser. But gradually, the cybercriminals started using it as a good weapon for money extortion. Hence, each one near you, whether a personal home computer user or an office colleague, should know about this malware and take every possible step to protect the system.</p>
<h4>How to get rid of the Ransomware malware?</h4>
<p>The ransomware is a gruesome problem that needs to rightly tacked down and dealt with. The FBI and other international law enforcement bodies have been issuing warning against such threats and their rising numbers.</p>
<p>With cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin, the attack has become more severe as now the attackers have found a way to extort money with anonymous identity. The FBI even estimated that the ransomware is on the pace to become a $1 billion source of earning for cybercriminals by 2016-year end, the number is expected to grow in 2017.</p>
<p >Paying ransom is not the end option as there is no guarantee that you will get the system or files back.Here are some tips to help you rescue your system from a ransom attack.</p>
<ul>
<li>Try running system under Windows safe run and other <strong>Microsoft ransomware removal</strong> tools.</li>
<li>Try system restore, by pressing the F8 key on your keyboard.</li>
<li>Install and run bootable scanners like Avast, AVG, Norton or Kaspersky.</li>
<li>Make sure you keep Windows firewall updated and always on and keep file history enabled.</li>
</ul>
<p >The ways of recovery depends upon the severity of the ransomware attack. The more you are aware of the software, the better you can protect your system. 
<br/>
<br/>
<h4> References:</h4>
<br/>
1. What Is Ransomware. (n.d.). Retrieved May 27, 2017, from http://isit.arts.ubc.ca/what-is-ransomware/
<br/>
2. Abraham, P., & B. (2017, May 15). What is Ransomware and How to Protect Your System From it. Retrieved May 27, 2017, from https://www.znetlive.com/blog/what-is-ransomware-and-protect-against-ransomware/ 

<a id='bigdata'></a>